# PROJECT: Data Modeling With Postgres

### introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

### Project Description

In this project, I applied what I have  learned on data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. To complete the project, you will need to define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

## project Dataset

#### 1.0 Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset.

**song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json**
**song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json**

#### 2.0 Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

**log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json**
**log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json**

### Running the python script

There are two python scrpts in the project **etl.py** and **create_tables.py** They can be run in order as below

python create_tables.py
python etl.py 

### Files in the repository

>**sql_queries.py**
># Contains sql query statement for etl.py and create_tables.py
> -create_table 
> -insert_table
> -drop_table
> -song_select

>**create_tables.py**
># contains the function that create the database and the table
> -create_table 
> -create_database
> -drop_table

>**etl.py**
># Contains functions that processes the song_file and the log_file
> - process_data
> - process song_file
> - process log_file


### Database Schema design

The databse schema design is a star schema consisting of a fact table(songplay)  and four dimension tables consisting of (users, songs, artists, time).This is used because star schemas are optimised for quer

### The Tables has the following columns

**songplay**

songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, 

**user_agent**

user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

**songs**

song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

**artists** 

artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude

**time**

start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday